---
layout: post
title: Programming tools I've recently tried
---

- Emacs **projectile and helm** for quickly navigating files/projects. This creates basically a highly souped-up "find file" dialog for Emacs, with spiffier autocompletion and an auto-updating list of possible completions. I think [autocomplete is a super important programming tool and interface paradigm](http://scraps.benkuhn.net/2015/07/25/progtools.html?fb_comment_id=1148285968518637_1148297208517513#f143f45dc) so I'm really glad for this.

- Emacs **ggtags** for quickly navigating Emacs source code by jumping to definitions/usage of functions (similar to cmd-click in Xcode). Only has a few features that `git grep` doesn't, but it has nicer integration with Emacs--it comes with hotkeys and a nice mode for navigating between tag occurrences. It also comes with a Helm datasource that lets you do a reasonable impression of Sublime's `cmd-t` behavior by merging together files and ggtags symbols. And a projectile integration to re-generate tags for the project (which I haven't set up yet).

- **[Notifications Scripting](http://www.cooperative-fruitiere.com/notifications/index_en.html)** to do fancy notification things with AppleScript. I use this to pop-up a notification every 10 minutes when Slack is running reminding me to quit it (Slack is great but it can be distracting to have open while I'm trying to do heads-down engineering work).

- **Git precommit hooks** to remind our team to get various pieces of code reviewed. The annoying thing about these is that they're not version controlled (they live inside the `.git` dir), so I had to write a special repo setup script that lived in version control and linked itself to `.git` and ran the hooks. (I'm surprised someone hadn't written it already, but whatever.)
