---
layout: post
title: Fun with code stats
---

This morning I started to play around with `sloccount` and Git's commit graphs for the Wave repositories. Some fun facts about the Wave server:

- I've added about 1/3 as many lines as our other engineers, but removed just as many lines. I AM THE CODE DESTROYER.

- Actually a lot of this seems to be driven by me being responsible for the commit that moved our tests to a different directory, which added 5k insertions and 5k deletions (and made me look *super* productive). I'm not sure if there's a flag you can give `git log` that causes it to ignore pure file movements.

- Our server is about 2mb of Python (as per the `/repos/<our org>/<our repo>/languages` API endpoint). This is about 30k lines as reported by `find . -name '*.py' | xargs wc -l`; `sloccount .` gives 20k. My favorite metric of codebase complexity--lines of code as reported by `coverage.py`--says we have about 7.5k lines that actually matter. (The rest of the `sloccount` lines are tests and scripts.)

- Our clients (Android and iOS) are each a bit bigger than our server, but not much. I guess if anything I would have expected the difference to be starker, since UI logic is super complex, but we have a fair amount of complex logic on the server as well to deal with all the crazy corner cases and error handling.

- Our iOS app is about 3k more SLOC than our Android app for approximately the same functionality. But there are a ton of confounders. (Different programmers; IIRC the iOS app was written first; the iOS app may have been more thoroughly tested/debugged...)

- `sloccount` estimates 4.5 person-years to develop our server, which I think just means that its estimates are super bad since the true number is probably ~1 person-year.

- Even excluding that one commit of mine with 5k insertions and deletions, I have the largest commits at ~50 insertions/commit; our CTO has the smallest at ~20 insertions/commit. (On the server--on the client we have a bunch of vendored dependencies that make the numbers less meaningful.)
